🗓️ GOAL TRACKER
A Calendar-Based To-Do Tracker with Honest Follow-Through Analytics

🧩 Overview
Tally is a personal calendar app built around a single uncomfortable question: of the things you said you were going to do, how many did you actually do?

It works like Google Calendar — write down what you intend to do on a given day, set tasks to repeat daily, weekly, or monthly, and navigate by date through a month-grid calendar. But unlike Google Calendar, every day has two columns side by side: a To Do column for what you intended, and a Completed column for what actually happened. Items move from left to right as the day unfolds.

Tally also extends past the daily horizon — it tracks medium-term goals (e.g. publish a peer-reviewed article) and long-term goals (e.g. get a PhD), with the user deciding what chronologically counts as each. And it adds something Google Calendar refuses to: a running, honest completion percentage at the top of every page, plus deeper analytics that break down follow-through by time frame and importance level. No padding, no spin, no flattering summaries.

👥 Who It's For
Graduate students and researchers -- need to track daily writing alongside multi-year dissertation goals and see whether the daily work is actually feeding the long-term work
Self-improvers and habit builders -- need an unforgiving mirror that shows whether daily intentions are being honored over weeks and months, not just remembered
Project-driven professionals -- need to hold both day-level execution and quarter/year-level milestones in one place, with deadlines that don't get lost
People who set goals and then forget them -- need a system where long-term goals stay visible while daily tasks get done, instead of one displacing the other
Anyone tired of productivity apps that pretend -- who wants raw completion percentages instead of streak badges, motivational quotes, and gamified nonsense
⚙️ Core Capabilities
Two-Column Day View -- Every day shows a To Do column and a Completed column side by side. Items start on the left and move to the right when checked off, with smooth animation. Reopen any item to move it back. A mini month-calendar on the left indicates which days have tasks and which were fully completed.

On a Day vs By a Day Scheduling -- Every task is scheduled either on a specific day (it appears that day only) or by a specific day (it has a deadline). "By" tasks get a dedicated Due By board that sorts every pending deadline from overdue → today → upcoming, so nothing slips just because it wasn't on today's list.

Recurring Tasks -- Tasks can repeat daily, weekly, or monthly, with an optional end date. Each occurrence is completed independently, so a recurring habit can be done some days and missed others — and the analytics see all of it.

Medium-Term and Long-Term Goals -- Goals are first-class tasks with their own page, separated into medium-term and long-term sections. The user picks the target date — Tally does not assume what counts as either. Each goal shows a progress bar based on time elapsed toward the target, days remaining, and a status of In progress, Achieved, or Missed.

Optional Importance Levels (1–10) -- Any task — daily, medium-term, or long-term — can carry an importance rating from 1 to 10. It's optional by design. Set it when it matters; leave it off when it doesn't.

Running Completion Rate -- A live overall completion percentage sits at the top of every page, alongside per-time-frame rates for daily, medium, and long. Recalculated on every change. No averaging tricks, no exclusions beyond what's analytically sound.

Three-Dimensional Analytics -- A dedicated analytics page breaks down completion three ways: overall, by time frame (daily / medium / long), and by importance level (1 through 10). Importance-level analytics tell you whether the things you said mattered most actually got done — or whether you've been quietly burying your priorities.

Fair Analytics Math -- Future-dated "on" tasks don't drag down the percentage (they can't be failed yet). "By" tasks count as missed only after their deadline passes without completion. Recurring tasks are counted per-occurrence, not per-template, so missing one Tuesday doesn't ruin the whole habit.

Local-First Persistence -- Everything is saved to browser local storage. No accounts, no sign-up, no server-side anything. Open the page, start using it, your data stays with you.

Quick Add From Anywhere -- A persistent Add button in the header opens a form for title, time frame, schedule type, date, optional recurrence, optional importance slider, and notes. Always one click away.

🎯 What Makes It Different
Two columns, not one -- The single biggest departure from Google Calendar. The to-do column is intention; the completed column is reality. Holding both side by side, day after day, is what makes the completion rate at the top mean something.

It tells you the truth in percentages -- Most calendar and habit apps reward you with streaks, stars, and emojis. Tally gives you a number. If your overall completion rate is 38%, that's what it says.

Long-term goals live in the same app -- Calendar apps handle today. Goal apps handle "someday." Tally refuses to separate them, because the whole point is to see whether daily behavior is feeding multi-year ambition.

The user defines the time horizons -- Tally has medium-term and long-term goals, but it does not declare what either means. Three months might be medium-term for one person and long-term for another. The user sets the date. The app holds it.

Optional importance, weaponized in analytics -- Importance is voluntary, but the moment you start using it, the analytics surface a brutal question: are you completing your 10s, or your 3s? Most people discover they're great at the easy ones and quietly avoiding the hard ones.

"By a day" is a first-class scheduling mode -- Google Calendar only lets you say what you're doing on a day. Tally lets you say what's due by a day, and surfaces every such item in one ranked list at the top of the Due By page, sorted by urgency.

Deadlines do not get forgotten -- A "by" task remains visible on every applicable day until it's done or the deadline passes. It doesn't disappear because you scrolled past it.

No accounts, no cloud, no nonsense -- All state lives in your browser. The app loads instantly, persists locally, and never asks for an email address.

Calm typography, considered color -- The interface is built to feel like a private journal you actually want to open every morning, not an enterprise productivity dashboard. Warm ink-on-paper palette, serif headings, deliberate restraint.

🛠️ Stack
React + Vite -- Frontend framework and build tool
TypeScript -- Type-safe application logic throughout
Tailwind CSS + shadcn/ui -- Design system and component primitives
date-fns -- All date arithmetic, recurrence math, and formatting
Recharts -- Completion-rate bar charts on the analytics page
Framer Motion -- Layout animations for tasks moving between columns
Wouter -- Lightweight client-side routing
LocalStorage -- Single-key persistence under tally:v1
📂 Project Structure
artifacts/calendar-todo/
├── src/
│   ├── App.tsx                  # Router + layout shell
│   ├── components/
│   │   ├── AppLayout.tsx        # Header, nav, running stats, Add button
│   │   ├── AddTaskDialog.tsx    # Task creation form
│   │   └── TaskRow.tsx          # Single task item with check-off animation
│   ├── pages/
│   │   ├── DayView.tsx          # Two-column day view + mini calendar
│   │   ├── Upcoming.tsx         # "Due By" deadline board
│   │   ├── Goals.tsx            # Medium- and long-term goals
│   │   └── Analytics.tsx        # Completion-rate charts and breakdowns
│   ├── lib/
│   │   ├── types.ts             # Task, Completion, Timeframe, etc.
│   │   ├── storage.ts           # LocalStorage store + React subscription
│   │   ├── recurrence.ts        # Occurrence generation for repeating tasks
│   │   ├── analytics.ts         # Completion-rate computation
│   │   └── seed.ts              # First-run sample data
│   └── index.css                # Color tokens (light + dark)

🚀 Running Locally
From the project root:

pnpm install
pnpm --filter @workspace/calendar-todo run dev

Then open the URL printed in the console. The app initializes with a small set of sample tasks on first run; clear them from the Analytics page using Clear all, or restore them with Reset to sample.